hi i'm amy in this video i'm going to be
talking through the solution to the seat
reservation problem
as a reminder the puzzle is set up so
that we have a hundred tables in a
restaurant
there have been a hundred guests that
have made a booking at the restaurant
including yourself
guest number one arrives and the booking
system is down and so they get seated
randomly by the restaurant staff
after that the other guests arrive one
by one and they get seated at the table
that they booked
if it's available and if it's not then
they're going to get seated randomly by
the restaurant staff
and now you arrive pretty late you're
the last person to get there
and so there's only going to be one
table remaining by the time you get
there
and that's where you're going to be
seated and what we want to look at is
what's the probability that the table
you get sat at is the one that you
booked
and now 100 tables feels like a large
number to be working with
and i think that the best way to break
this problem down
is to maybe have a think about a smaller
number of tables to start off with
so let's start by having a look at a two
table example and see what the
probability is
so we've got table number one that was
booked by guest number one
and we've got your table that you booked
so guest number one is going to arrive
first
and there are clearly only two different
scenarios that can take place
so first of all they could be sat at
their own table table number one
and secondly they could get sat at your
table
and because both these things happen
randomly we know that they're both
going to happen with probability a half
and now when you arrive if guest number
one is sat at table number one
then your table is the one that's free
and you're going to get sat there
in this scenario where guest number one
is sat at your table then the one that's
left waiting for you is going to be
table number one
and so you don't get the table that you
booked
and so if we look at both of these
scenarios the only way that you get sat
at your table
is where guest number one has been sat
at table number one and so that happens
with probability
a half great so we see that we get a
half in this case
and maybe you could already see that
before we started it's quite a simple
example
and so let's make it ever so slightly
more complicated and let's have a look
at a three table example instead
so the table is booked by guest number
one guest number two
and then your table this time when guest
number one arrives
we can see that there are three
different scenarios that could take
place
so the first of these would be that they
sit at their own table
the second one would be that they set a
table number two
and the third one will be that they sit
at your table
and as before these are all equally
likely so we know that they're going to
happen
with probability a third
in this scenario where guest number one
is sat at table number one
then when guest number two arrives their
table will be free so they'll sit there
and then that leaves your table
available when you arrive so you will
get the table that you booked
in this scenario here where guest number
one is sat at your table
then obviously it can't be free when you
arrive and so you don't get the table
that you booked
so let's have a look at this middle
scenario where guest number one
is sat at table number two now when
guest number two arrives
their table isn't available and so
they've got a choice of where to sit
and so they can either be started table
number one or your table
and both are equally likely so both
happen with probability a half
and so if guest number two is at table
number one then your table will be
available when you arrive
so you get the table that you booked and
if guest number two is sat at your table
then you can't sit there you'll be sat
at table number one when you arrive
and so if we have a look at the overall
picture
the only way that you end up sat at your
table
is either when guest number one is at
table number one which happened with
probability a third
or when guest number one sits at table
number two which happens with
probability of third as well
and then guest number two goes on to set
a table number one
which happens a probability of half so
the overall probability
is going to be equal to a third
plus a third times by a half
which is equal to a half now this i
think is pretty
interesting we've got a half for the two
table example
and for the three table example and so
at this point you kind of start to think
maybe there's a bit of a pattern in our
results
i think what we want to do now is have a
look at the hundred table example
and see whether we can apply a similar
process to work out what the probability
will be
especially now we maybe have a slight
suspicion that it could be a half
but it also could still be something
else as well and we're going to start
off by looking at what happens when
guest number one arrives
and guess number one arrives there are
three distinct cases
that can occur case number one
will be where guest number one sits at
their own table
and in this case then guest number two's
table will be available when they arrive
so they'll sit there
all the way up to guest number 99 and so
your table will be available when you
get
there so you sit at the table that you
booked
the second scenario is when guest number
one sits at one of the tables between
number two
and number 99 and
in this case we don't actually know what
will happen when you arrive
at that point we'd have to determine
that further on when a different guest
arrived
and finally case number three is where
guest number one sits at your table
and now obviously your table is taken so
you can't be sat there so you don't get
the table that you booked
so we can see here that case number one
and case number three are deterministic
so if either one of those occurs then we
know
where you end up being sat and we can
sort of end the puzzle there
but if case number two happens then we
don't know what's going to happen
further down the line and we don't know
which table that you end up with
and now there are a hundred tables in
this scenario so
the probability of guess number one
being sat at table number one is one
over a hundred
the probability of case number two
occurring is ninety-eight over a hundred
and the probability of case number three
is also one over a hundred
okay so let's consider case two a little
bit further let's assume that we haven't
had case number one or case number three
happen
with guest number one so let's choose
randomly that guest number one since the
table number six
and now when guests number two up to
number five arrive
their tables will all be available and
so they can just sit there
but when guest number six arrives their
table is going to be taken
and so they have a decision about where
to sit and now we get the exact same
cases as before
so guest number six can sit at table
number one
and then guest number seven up to number
99 can all take their seats
and you get your table or guest number
six could end up sat somewhere between
table number seven and table number 99
where again we then don't know where you
end up sat
or we can get case 3 occurring again in
which case your table is taken by guest
number 6
and you can't sit there now this time
there are 95 tables remaining
so the probability of this case is 1
over 95
this one is going to be 93 over 95
and this one's going to be 1 over 95.
now again let's consider case 2 a bit
further so let's assume
that guest number six sits at table
number 42
so table number 42 is then taken
when guest number 42 arrives and
everyone before that point
will have been sat in the right seat so
guess number 42.
now again maybe unsurprisingly we get
the same three cases as before
so we either have case one in which case
guests 43 up to 49 can all take their
seats
and you can take your seat or we can
have guest number 42
sitting at any of the tables between 43
and 99
and finally we could have that guest
number 42 is sat at your table
and obviously then you don't get to sit
there because there they've taken it
and so we can see that this will keep
happening and
it could be that we get all the way to
guest number 99
and then they are the guest that either
has to choose case number one
or case number three but we know that
definitely
at least one guest has to choose either
case number one
or case number three because that's the
only way we determine whether you're sat
at table number one or your table
if that decision was left to guest
number 99 then they would have
for case number one they would have a
half probability and
for case number three they would also
have a half probability
so there's no chance of case number two
because there aren't any further tables
and so if we have a look back we've
obviously just chosen random numbers
here
but this could have happened for any of
the guests so for guess number one
we have probability one over 100 of case
number one occurring
and probability one over hundred of case
number three occurring so they're both
equal for guess number six again
we can see that they're equal the
probability is going to be
one over 59 for guess number 42 and
again they're equal
all the way up to guess number 99 who
again they're obviously equal for
and so as i said we don't know which the
guess is going to choose case number one
or case number three but we know
that definitely one of them will and at
most one of them will because
both table one and your table can't both
be taken and so
for every single guess there's equal
probability of them choosing case one or
case three
and so the overall probability is going
to be equal to a half
that case number one occurs and you get
your table so now we see that our
intuition was right and we do get a half
again for a hundred tables
because following that previous line of
argument in the hundred table example
we can see that it's not the number of
tables that's important
what's really important is because of
the random seating
every single guess has an equally likely
probability of choosing table number one
compared to their probability of
choosing your table and so this equal
probability leads to the probability
being a half overall
i hope you found this interesting thanks
for watching bye